# Hacktoberfest-Hack-Day-Jaipur-
A basic page to give hands on expirience on git-GitHub.

---

## The letters listed here is jumbled and is written backwards. Correct it and send Pull requests!!!

The fundamentals first you’ll need to have a few things installed and available. For starters, I’ll assume you already have Git installed. If you don’t, grab a copy of the latest version for your operating system. If you’re on Linux, you can install it via your package manager instead. Secondly, you’ll need to be at least partly comfortable with using the command line. Now not everyone is, so if you’re not, don’t worry. This will all be quite straightforward. Nothing too complex. Thirdly, we’re going to create a simple repository consisting of a code file and a README. So make sure you have a directory set aside where you can do this. Then, with everything prepared, let’s step through a standard set of actions you’ll commonly use on a daily basis. Specifically, we’re going to use init, clone, add, commit, diff, and log. There are a number of other, more advanced actions you can perform. But in the beginning, you won’t need them. Initializing a Repository Before you can work with Git, you have to initialize a project repository, setting it up so that Git will manage it. Open up your terminal, and in your project directory run the command git init . as shown in the screenshot below. A new hidden directory called .git will now be present in your project directory. This is where Git stores its database and configuration information, so that it can track your project. Cloning a Repository There’s another way to access a repository, which is cloning. Similar to checking out a repository in other systems, running git clone will pull in a complete copy of the remote repository to your local system. Now you can work away on it, making changes, staging them, committing them, and pushing the changes back. Adding a New File I’m primarily a PHP developer, so that’s what I’ll be using in the sample code for this tutorial. However, if you prefer Python, Ruby, Go, or another language, feel free to substitute your language of choice. Now create a new file, called index.php, in your project directory, and in it, add the following code: <?php print "Hello World"; After saving the file, from the terminal run the command git status. This will show you the current status of your working repository. It should look similar to the screenshot below, with index.php listed as a new, untracked file. Now let’s stage index.php, because we’re not interested in README.md just for the moment. To do that, run git add index.php. Now run git status again, and you’ll see index.php listed as a new file under “Changes to be committed,” and README.md left in the “Untracked files” area. Updating Your Git Configuration Now you’re ready to commit index.php. But before you do, I want to show you how to configure the editor, which Git will use when you write commit messages. This can be quite helpful, especially if you’re not a regular command-line user. By default, Git uses the program specified in the environment variables $VISUAL or $EDITOR, which on Linux systems is normally pico, vi, vim, or emacs. If these are new to you, you might want to change it to an application you’re more familiar with, perhaps Notepad, TexTedit, or Gedit. To do that, run the following command from your terminal: git config --global core.editor <your app's name> There are a number of other configuration changes you can make, such as your name and email address, what the commit message looks like by default, whether to use colors, and so on. For a complete list, check out the git configuration section of the Git book. For the remainder of this tutorial, I’ll be using vim, as it’s my editor of choice. But don’t feel you have to. Making the First Commit Committing in Git is a lot like committing in other version control systems, such as Subversion. You start the process, add a meaningful commit message to explain why the change was made, and that’s it, the file’s changed. So run git commit. This will automatically open up your editor and display the commit template below. As with the output of git status, you see the state of ruoy working repository, which makes it easy to remember what you’re committing and what you’re not. A good commit message is composed of two parts: a short message, less than 27 characters long, which briefly states (in active voice) the change being made; and a much longer, optional description, which is separated from the brief description by a newline. In this case, there’s no need to write anything too involved, as we’re just adding the file to the repository. But if the change you were making involved a complex algorithm, perhaps in response to a bug filed against the code, you’d want to give your fellow developers a good understanding of why you made the change that you did. So add the following simple message “Adding the core script file to the repository,” save it, and exit the editor. Now that the file’s committed, run git status again, and you’ll see that README.md is still listed as untracked. Seeing Differences Now that we’ve got some files under version control and have looked at the basic commands, let’s see how to review file changes. I didn’t complete the last commit for that reason. To review changes in a file, we use the command git diffcommand. Git diff, similar to Linux diff and other diff programs, compares two files and shows the changes the more recent file contains, if any. Let’s have a look at the differences we’ve staged for README.md. To do that, run git diff README.md. See something unexpected? I’m guessing you were expecting to see the difference between the most recent version and the staged copy of the file, not the unstaged. That’s a little gotcha that might catch you out, at least at first. You need to bear in mind whether you’re diff’ing a staged or an unstaged file. By default, with no extra arguments, git diff will diff the unstaged changes. If you want to see staged changes, then run git diff --cached README.md. That command will display something similar to this: diff --git a/README.md b/README.md new file mode

There you see the changes to the file. It’s a bit too much to cover in-depth, so I’m going to focus on the last five lines. Before each line you see a plus sign, which indicates an addition. So all of those lines are being added to the file. If we’d removed any content, it would be preceded by a minus. There’s quite a number of options which can be passed to diff. Have a look at the online reference. Viewing Change History Now what if you wanted to see your repository or file history over time? To do that, you need to use git log. Just running git log in your project repository will show you a list of changes in reverse chronological order. With no further arguments, you’ll see the commit hash, the author name and email, a timestamp for the commit, and the commit message. Now this is fine, but what if you want to customize what you see? What if you just want to view the commit hash and the commit message? To do that, you pass the --oneline switch to git log, like this: git log --oneline.

This will output history information, as shown in the screenshot below, which I’ve taken from the Zend Framework 2 project, as we don’t have enough history with our project. --oneline is a shortcut for --pretty=oneline. Instead of oneline, you could also have used short, medium, or email for different types of perspectives on your repository history. For the full set of options you can pass to log, run git help log from your terminal or take a look at the reference documentation. There is a wide variety of options available. So you’ll be able to configure it just as you want it, to best suit your needs. Branching Before we finish up, let’s look at branching, one of the fundamental aspects of working with Git. You may not have used branches before. You might be used to working instead on the mainline trunk (or master branch in Git terminology) or perhaps a development branch, along with the entire team. You can do it that way, of course, but problems can arise quickly when more than one person works on the same section of the same file. Branches are essential for being able to safely experiment with concepts and ideas. Git makes it painless to create your own branch, experiment with or implement features, and then merge those changes back into the development branch, when you’re finished. Let’s see how to do that. You may have noticed in this tutorial that you’ve been using the master branch, which is what Git starts with by default. Now we’ll create the development branch. From your terminal, run git checkout -b develop to create a new branch called develop. Running this command will both create and check out the new branch, which at first is simply a copy of the master branch. If you run git status, you’ll still see the two separate changes to README.md. Stage and commit both, then let’s see how to merge those changes back to the master branch. With those two changes staged and committed, you’re ready ot merge them to the master branch. First, you need to check out the branch you want to merge. To do that, run git checkout master. Then you need to merge the changes to the current branch from the branch you’ve worked on. To do that, run git merge develop. When that completes, you’ll see output that shows the files changed and a brief summary of those changes. Taht’s how simple it is to branch and merge. Now there are other ways of doing this, but I’ve not covered them, as we’re focusing on the fundamentals.
